docs: introduce docs for clustering (#4344)
grafana/agent: docs/sources/flow/concepts/clustering.md

---
title: Clustering
weight: 500
labels:
  stage: beta
---

# Clustering (beta)

Clustering enables Grafana Agent Flow to coordinate a fleet of agents working
together for workload distribution and high availability. It helps create
horizontally scalable deployments with minimal resource and operational
overhead.

To achieve this, Grafana Agent makes use of an eventually consistent model that
assumes all participating Agents are interchangeable and converge on using the
same configuration file.

The behavior of a standalone, non-clustered agent is the same as if it was a
single-node cluster.

In comparison to [hashmod sharding][] as a scaling mechanism, clustering with
target auto-distribution provides high availability without requiring multiple
replicas for the same shard, and can dynamically reshard targets without

> changes to the configuration file.

Reviewer: Hm, we haven't really ever talked about the hashmod sharding approach w/r/t Flwo mode, and we haven't ever linked to static mode docs from Flow mode either. 

Should we drop the comparison and only talk about the benefits of clustering? 

cc @clayton-cornell

Reviewer 2: IMO I like the focus on what we are offering and ignoring hashmod/scraping service mode.

Author: Ok, leaving the comparisons out for now.

## Use cases

[Setting up][] clustering using the command-line arguments is the first step in
making agents aware of one another.
Components in a telemetry pipeline need to explicitly opt-in to participating
to a clustering use case in their River config.

### Target auto-distribution

Target auto-distribution is the most basic use case of clustering; it allows
scraping components running on all peers to distribute scrape load between
themselves. All nodes must have access to the same service discovery APIs, and
the set of targets should converge on a timeline comparable to the scrape
interval.

Whenever a cluster state change is detected, either due to a new node joining
or an existing node going away, all participating components locally
recalculate target ownership and rebalance the number of targets they’re
scraping without explicitly communicating ownership over the network.

The agent makes use of a fully-local consistent hashing algorithm to distribute
targets, meaning that on average only ~1/N of the targets are redistributed.
This is in contrast to hashmod sharding where up to 100% of the targets could

> be reassigned to another node and possibly cause system instability.

Reviewer: Ditto here with the comparison: I'm not sure if we should be trying to sell people on clustering compared to other approaches here, and instead we could focus solely on the benefits of clustering (esp. since it's the only scaling mechanism we're choosing to document for Flow mode).

As such, target auto-distribution not only allows to dynamically scale the
number of agents to distribute workload during peaks, but also provides
resiliency, since in the event of a node going away, its targets are
automatically picked up by one of their peers. Again, this is in contrast to
hashmod sharding which requires running multiple replicas of each shard for HA.

The components who can make use of target auto-distribution are the following:
- [prometheus.scrape][]
- [pyroscope.scrape][]
- [prometheus.operator.podmonitors][]

> - [prometheus.operator.servicemonitors][]

Reviewer: This list is going to quickly become stale. Should we make it clear that this list is an example of some components which have clustering support, and how readers can know if a component supports clustering based on the reference page for a component?

Author: I'll include the presence of the `clustering` block as the way to figure out whether a component can opt-in and mention these are example components that can use it.

> These components can opt-in to auto-distributing targets between nodes by
> defining the `clustering` block like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These components can opt-in to auto-distributing targets between nodes by
adding a `clustering` block with the `enabled` argument set to true: 
```

```river
prometheus.scrape "default" {
    clustering {
      enabled = true
    }
    ...
}
```

> ## Local clustering example

Reviewer: Do examples belong in concept documentation? Should this be a tutorial, or a getting started guide instead? 

cc @clayton-cornell

Reviewer 3: From our discussion... generally you would keep code examples to topics where they are being discussed (generally tasks and tutorials). But... a concept can definitely have an example code snippet if it helps clarify the top level description of the feature.

The following commands bootstrap a three-node local cluster
```
# node-a (seed node)

> $ ./build/grafana-agent-flow \

Reviewer: Readers might not understand where the `./build` folder came from.

    --server.http.listen-addr=0.0.0.0:12345 \
    --cluster.enabled --cluster.node-name=node-a\
    --cluster.advertise-address=localhost:12345 \
    run local-clustering.river

# node-b
$ ./build/grafana-agent-flow \
    --server.http.listen-addr=0.0.0.0:12346 \
    --cluster.enabled --cluster.node-name=node-b \
    --cluster.advertise-address=localhost:12346 \
    --cluster.join-addresses=localhost:12345 \
    run local-clustering.river

# node-c
$ ./build/grafana-agent-flow \
    --server.http.listen-addr=0.0.0.0:12347 \
    --cluster.enabled --cluster.node-name=node-c \
    --cluster.advertise-address=localhost:12347 \
    --cluster.join-addresses=localhost:12345,localhost:12346 \
    run local-clustering.river
```

The clustering UI page of each node will provide information about the status
of its peers and the details page of the each node's `prometheus.scrape`
component will point to which target is being scraped by that node in its
Debug Info.

## Helm chart clustering example

The easiest way to deploy an agent cluster is by making use of our
[Helm chart][]. Here's an example of how to achieve that.

> The following `values.yaml` file deploys anStatefulSet for metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following `values.yaml` file deploys a StatefulSet for metrics
```

collection. It makes use of a [headless service][] to retrieve the IPs of the
agent pods for the `--cluster.join-addresses` argument, as well as an
[Horizontal Pod Autoscaler][] (HPA) for dynamically matching demand.

```yaml

> --- clustering-values.yaml ---

Reviewer: Users might accidentally paste this in, I think we should take the filename header out of both code blocks.

> agent:

Reviewer: There's a lot of fields here which aren't relevant to enabling clustering. Should we trim this down to only what a user needs to include in their custom values.yaml?

    - "--cluster.join-addresses=grafana-agent"  # Uses the headless service name, which defaults to the installation name.

  # -- The minimum resources required for scheduling; required for using autoscaling.
  resources:
    requests:
      cpu: 100m
      memory: 200Mi

controller:
  type: 'statefulset'

  # -- Whether to enable automatic deletion of stale PVCs due to a scale down operation, when controller.type is 'statefulset'.
  enableStatefulSetAutoDeletePVC: true

  autoscaling:
    # -- Creates a HorizontalPodAutoscaler for controller type deployment.
    enabled: true
    # -- The lower limit for the number of replicas to which the autoscaler can scale down.
    minReplicas: 3
    # -- The upper limit for the number of replicas to which the autoscaler can scale up.
    maxReplicas: 8
    # -- Average Memory utilization across all relevant pods, a percentage of the requested value of the resource for the pods. Setting `targetMemoryUtilizationPercentage` to 0 disables Memory scaling.
    targetMemoryUtilizationPercentage: 80

service:
  # -- Creates a Headless Service for the controller's pods.
  enabled: true
  type: ClusterIP
  clusterIP: 'None'
```

> Also, here's a simple River config file

Reviewer: There's missing instructions here that tell the user what to do with this file w/r/t to the example. The values.yaml you've instructed the user to use doesn't make use of this, either.

```river
--- clustering.river ---
logging {
	level  = "info"
	format = "logfmt"
}

discovery.kubernetes "pods" {
	role = "pod"
}

prometheus.scrape "pods" {
	clustering {
		enabled = true
	}
	targets    = discovery.kubernetes.pods.targets
	forward_to = [prometheus.remote_write.default.receiver]
}

prometheus.remote_write "default"{
	endpoint {
		url = env("PROMETHEUS_URL")
		basic_auth {
			username = env("PROMETHEUS_USERNAME")
			password = env("PROMETHEUS_API_KEY")

> 		}

Reviewer: These environment variables aren't set in the values.yaml you've instructed the user to use.

> ---

Reviewer: I'm a little worried the concept page is doing too much. 

From the Writers' Toolkit on [Concept topics](https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/writing-guide/topic-types/concept/#concept-topic):

> The following types of content can be included in concepts:
>
> * Detailed overviews of Grafana’s features with benefits and clearly defined terms
> * Diagrams that help users understand the components of a system
> * Process flow diagrams
> * Best practice guidelines
> * An example of how a feature is used. Examples might include screenshots or other supporting visuals
> 
> A concept topic does not include:
>
> * Step-by-step instructions
> * Reference information, such as lookup tables or lists of values

I would suggest splitting this doc up, where this focuses more on the benefits of clustering, and maybe some architectural diagrams, with best practices. 

I would move everything else to either the appropriate reference topic (i.e., documenting command line flags in cli/run.md) or troubleshooting information to the [Debugging](https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/flow/monitoring/debugging/) page.

@clayton-cornell Am I off-base here?

Author: Ok, I've went through a second iteration of this

a) The command-line flags with their explanation have been moved back to the `run` command docs
b) The debugging information is more high-level now and has been decoupled from mentions of the mixin dashboards; it mentions the new UI page and logs instead which will always be present
c) There's a new page just for the `mixin` with instructions for people who want to install it and showcasing the clustering dashboards
d) The concepts clustering page is now more streamlined with less 'empty' braggadocious statements. It highlights the target auto-distribution usecase first, and shows the Helm section more clearly as an example.

I'll look into whether there's any diagrams to be added or a best practices section, but let me know if there's any other high-level structure suggestions cc @mattdurham

Reviewer 2: I would still like to see an example that doesn't depend on helm/k8s, so people know its not just for k8s. Even if its a one liner running the raw executable multiple times.

Reviewer: @mattdurham I agree, but can we make that a follow up task for when Paschalis is back from PTO?

title: Clustering
weight: 500
labels:
  stage: beta
---

# Clustering (beta)

Clustering enables Grafana Agent Flow to coordinate a fleet of agents to
work together for workload distribution and high availability. It makes agent
deployments horizontally scalable by default, and minimizes the operational
overhead of managing your agent infrastructure to handle demand.

To achieve this, Grafana Agent makes use of an eventually consistent model and
the lightweight [grafana/ckit][] framework. All running nodes are assumed to
use the same configuration and have access to the same type of hardware and

> network resources such as PVCs and service discovery APIs.

Author: Agreed, I'll try to make it a bit more generic. How does this sound:
```
To achieve this, Grafana Agent makes use of an eventually consistent model that
assumes all participating Agents are interchangeable and converge on using the
same configuration file.
```

> network resources such as PVCs and service discovery APIs.

Reviewer: That's better, I like it 👍

Clustering is built from the ground-up to be the de-facto answer to "how do I
scale my Grafana Agent setup" in the future. As an example, in comparison to a
setup using [hashmod sharding][], clustering with target auto-distribution
scales and provides resiliency at _half_ the cost in resources and provides

> dynamic resharding without the need to change configuration files.

Author: Yeah, this paragraph wasn't as useful. I've substituted it for a fairer comparison to hashmod sharding in the intro, to reinforce what the benefits of clustering can be.

```
In comparison to [hashmod sharding][] as a scaling mechanism, clustering with
target auto-distribution provides high availability without requiring multiple
replicas for the same shard, and can dynamically reshard targets without
changes to the configuration file.
```

The behavior of a standalone, non-clustered agent is the same as if it was a

> 1-node cluster.

Reviewer: [Spell out numerals less than 10](https://developers.google.com/style/numbers):

```suggestion
one-node cluster.
```

Reviewer: Alternatively, you could say "single-node cluster" here too.

## Usage

> The following set of command-line flags are used to configure clustering:

Reviewer: This feels like detailed reference documentation to me, plus we already document these flags in the cli page. Should we link to that page here?

Author: I removed the documentation from the `run` command page when I tried to gather everything here.

Since you think it reads too heavy, let's separate the info back and see how it looks like!

- `--server.http.listen-addr`: the address where the agent’s HTTP server
  listens to.
- `--cluster.enabled`: enables cluster awareness.
- `--cluster.node-name`: defines the name used by the cluster node. If not
  provided, it defaults to the machine's hostname.
- `--cluster.advertise-address`: defines the address the agent advertises for
  its peers to connect to. If not provided, it is inferred automatically.
- `--cluster.join-addresses`: accepts a comma-separated list of addresses to
  join the cluster at. These can be IP addresses with an optional port, or a
DNS record to lookup.

Peers communicate over HTTP/2 on the agent's built-in HTTP server. Each node
must be configured to accept connections from one another on the address
defined or inferred in `--cluster.advertise-address`.

Each cluster member’s name must be unique within the cluster. Nodes which try
to join with a conflicting name are rejected.

If the advertised address is not explicitly set, the agent tries to infer a

> suitable one from the `eth0` and `en0` local network interfaces.

Reviewer: This is missing information on:

* What does the inference do? 
* What happens when the inference fails?

Author: I've added some more details when moving this back to the run command page. Should we put more detail?

---
title: Clustering
weight: 500
labels:
  stage: beta
---

# Clustering (beta)

Agent Clustering enables Grafana Agent Flow to coordinate a fleet of agents to
work together for workload distribution and high availability. It makes agent
deployments horizontally scalable by default, and minimizes the operational
overhead of managing your agent infrastructure to handle demand.

To achieve this, Grafana Agent makes use of an eventually consistent model and
the lightweight [grafana/ckit][] framework. All running nodes are assumed to

> use the same configuration and have access to the same type of hardware and

Reviewer 2: Maybe add somewhere later a bit about convergence around a config when rolling our new configurations, there is some of this in the troubleshooting but from reading this line to me it says I cant do a rolling release but have to do a full up and down when changing configuration.

network resources such as PVCs and service discovery APIs.

Clustering is built from the ground-up to be the de-facto answer to "how do I
scale my Grafana Agent setup" in the agent's future. As an example, in
comparison to a horizontally-scalable setup using [hashmod sharding][],
clustering with target auto-distribution scales and provides resiliency at
_half_ the cost in resources and without the need of changing configuration
files for resharding.

The behavior of a standalone, non-clustered agent is the same as if it was a
1-node cluster.

## Usage

The following set of command-line flags are used to configure clustering when
starting up Grafana Agent:
- `--server.http.listen-addr`: the address where the agent’s HTTP server
  listens to.

> - `--cluster.enabled`: enables cluster awareness.

Reviewer 2: Why do I need this if `The behavior of a standalone, non-clustered agent is the same as if it was a
1-node cluster.` is true?

Reviewer 2: I personally like the notion that agent is always clustering even if one, avoids the multiple apps in one that we got with static mode.

- `--cluster.node-name`: defines the name used by the cluster node. If not
  provided, it defaults to the machine's hostname.

> - `--cluster.advertise-address`: defines the address the agent advertises for

Reviewer 2: Add a comment on where it is inferred from, I am assuming from `--server.http.listen-addr`

Author: No, because `--server.http.listen-addr` is likely to be something generic like `0.0.0.0:12345`.

By default, `ckit` [looks into](https://github.com/grafana/ckit/blob/30fb40ef3315f650acdebcba10c338ca4f062693/advertise/addr.go#L14-L18
) the `eth0`, `en0` local network interfaces to find a suitable address

I tried to explain this below, but I can add some more information to make this clearer.

  its peers to connect to. If not provided, it is inferred automatically.
- `--cluster.join-addresses`: accepts a comma-separated list of addresses to
  join the cluster at. These can be IP addresses with an optional port, or a
DNS record to lookup.

Cluster communication happens over HTTP/2 on the agents’ HTTP listener. The
agents must be configured to accept connections from one another on the address

> defined by the `--server.http.listen-addr` flag.

Reviewer 2: Is using `--server.http.listen-addr` accurate if I am using `--cluster.advertise-address`?

Author: Nope, you're right, thanks!

Each cluster member’s name must be unique within the cluster. Nodes which try

> to join with a conflicting name are rejected.

Reviewer 2: What does rejected mean? Not added to the cluster or show up in the cluster diagram but in a bad state?

Author: They're never added to the cluster. Nodes that detect conflicted names (eg. during the initial full synchronization when joining the cluster) will bail early and refuse to gossip messages about the new node joining.

If the advertised address is not explicitly set, the agent tries to find a
suitable one from the `eth0` and `en0` local network interfaces.

The ports on the join-addresses list default to the port of the node’s HTTP
listener if not explicitly provided; it’s generally recommended to align the
port numbers on as many nodes as possible to simplify the deployment process.

Finally, the first node that is used to bootstrap a new cluster (also known as
the "seed node") can either omit specifying the flag that specifies peers to
join or can try to connect to itself.

> ## Deploy clustering using the Helm chart

Author: I've amended this to sound more like an example rather than a guide, and moved the actual instructions around command-line flags page.

I tried spinning something up with docker-compose, but since Flow doesn't have a /-/ready endpoint, it made waiting for the seed node to have something to connect to quite ugly so I think we may leave it for now. WDYT?

The easiest way to deploy agent clustering is by making use of our
[Helm chart][].

The following `values.yaml` file deploys an agent StatefulSet for metrics
collection. It makes use of a [headless service][] to retrieve the IPs of the

> agent pods for the `--cluster.join-addresses` argument, as well as an HPA for

Reviewer 2: Link or expand HPA? A

---
title: Clustering
weight: 500
labels:
  stage: beta
---

> # Clustering (beta)

Reviewer 4: Would be nice to have a comparison of clustering vs hashmod, and when to chose what in different situations?

Reviewer: For now we don't want to document anything other than clustering, since we want to only recommend clustering for scaling Flow agent installs.

Reviewer 4: I was thinking that eventual consistency might be a problem for some customers? Although that probably shouldn't be the case, since Prometheus is designed in a way that it doesn't have to give 100% accurate data. If super accurate data is what customers want, probably Prometheus isn't the way to go. But then, clustering isn't just for Prometheus :) I'm happy if we don't mention hashmod for now, but I think eventually we might have to.

Clustering enables a fleet of agents to work together for workload distribution
and high availability. It helps create horizontally scalable deployments with
minimal resource and operational overhead.

To achieve this, Grafana Agent makes use of an eventually consistent model that
assumes all participating Agents are interchangeable and converge on using the
same configuration file.

The behavior of a standalone, non-clustered agent is the same as if it was a
single-node cluster.

Clustering is configured by passing `cluster` command-line flags to the [run][]
command.

[run]: {{< relref "../reference/cli/run.md#clustering-beta" >}}

## Use cases

### Target auto-distribution

Target auto-distribution is the most basic use case of clustering; it allows
scraping components running on all peers to distribute scrape load between
themselves. All nodes must have access to the same service discovery APIs, and
the set of targets should converge on a timeline comparable to the scrape

> interval.

Reviewer 4: > the set of targets should converge on a timeline comparable to the scrape interval

- This makes is sound that the time to converge goes up and down depending on the length of the scrape interval that is configured. 
- Also, it's not clear whose responsibility it is to make sure this is the case - does the Agent do it automatically, or is there a config option to make sure the converge interval is similar?

Reviewer: i've reworked this sentence a bit and dropped the line about converging the targets. I have a rough idea of what Paschalis is trying to mention here, but I think convergence usually happens fast enough, and scrape intervals are usually high enough, that we don't need to document anything just yet.

Target auto-distribution must be explicitly enabled on components by defining a
`clustering` block, such as:

```river
prometheus.scrape "default" {
    clustering {
        enabled = true
    }

    ...
}
```

Whenever a cluster state change is detected, either due to a new node joining
or an existing node going away, all participating components locally
recalculate target ownership and rebalance the number of targets they’re
scraping without explicitly communicating ownership over the network.

As such, target auto-distribution not only allows to dynamically scale the
number of agents to distribute workload during peaks, but also provides
resiliency, since in the event of a node going away, its targets are
automatically picked up by one of their peers.

The agent makes use of a fully-local consistent hashing algorithm to distribute
targets, meaning that on average only ~1/N of the targets are redistributed.

Refer to component reference documentation to discover whether it supports

> clustering, such as:

Reviewer: Does this imply that the list is exhaustive? That's what I'm trying to avoid, since I'm worried this list will quickly become stale and annoying to maintain separately from reference docs.

> clustering, such as:

Reviewer 3: Mmmm... yeah good point. I've edited the suggestion to add `for example`. That relieves the pressure for it being a complete list of all cases.
